# Computer build done

As said about two weeks ago, I'm going to build and install a new computer
for chess engine development. After some effort and searching through
stores in the Netherlands I've been able to find all parts I wanted for
relatively decent prices. They're still expensive enough, mind you, but
they were within expectation. The only two parts that were more expensive
than the counterparts in my old computer were the CPU and the motherboard,
but both are much more powerful and feature-rich than those in the old
system, so it was expected.

What I did not expect whas the massive weight of the motherboard compared
to the old one. Also, each time I build a new computer, I go like: "Wow.
That graphics card is big. And the CPU cooler is massive." That was no
different this time: the graphics card and CPU-cooler are the biggest ones
I've ever installed into a computer. Mind you: I only build a computer once
every 7-8 years. The "lets upgrade the hardware after two years" time is
over for me; first, it's not required anymore and second, I don't have the
time to tinker with my system. So these days, I buy the parts, build the
computer, install the OS (Debian Linux in my case) and then I forget about
it and just use it until it can't do anymore what I want it to do. My
previous computer (the i7-6700K) hit that wall when it comes to chess
programming. Testing just takes too long. (I cannot even imagine how people
wrote chess engines between 1975 and 2005... exhaustive testing would have
been almost impossible in the old days.)

As said in the previous post, testing will not only save me time, but also
power. This realization did not save me from the shock of seeing the number
of power cables having to be connected for a current-day system. I remember
the times of the Pentium 4, a bit over 20 years ago from this time of
writing, where the internet broke out in a rage because Intel added an
extra 4-pin connector to the motherboard to power the Pentium 4 CPU. The
MONSTERS! How could they do such a devious thing, drawing SO MUCH POWER?!

Note that these where the days where you had quite a big power supply if
you were running 300+ Watts. Current mid-range systems run AT LEAST a 600W
power supply. Mine runs 850W; even though I don't actually need that much,
I don't like ever having to run the PSU at full capacity.

In my new computer, I connected the following power cables:

- 24-pin ATX
- 6-pin for the USB-C and USB4 ports
- 8-pin (2x) for the CPU
- 8-pin (2x) for the graphics card

That is 46 pins of power, where a P4 back then only required a 20-pin ATX
connector and a 4-pin CPU connector. Having a dedicated PSU cage with a PSU
shroud and good cable management behind the case's right hand panel was
non-existent in 2003, a nice to have in 2013, but now in 2023, it's
absolutely essential. The power cables I've run to the mainboard feel
absolutely monstrous, and this isn't even the most power-hungry prosumer
system that can be built.

The amount of fans in a current system is also massive compared to the old
days. In the Pentium II and Pentium III days you just had the CPU fan on
the slot-cartridge. Later you had a tower cooler (especially with the
super-hot AMD chips in the early 2000's) and a smallish fan on the graphics
card if you had a powerful model. Maybe an 80mm case fan. That was it.

My i7-6700K that is about to be replaced (built in 2016) has a few 80mm
fans: one for the CPU, one intake, one exhaust, and 2 built into the
graphics card. That was a lot already compared to any earlier system I
owned.

The new computer, which these ramblings are about, has 120mm fans: two for
the CPU, two intakes, one exhaust, and three 80mm's on the graphics card.
(I could have used the 140mm case fans that came with the case, but they
were too loud for my liking. These Noctua 120mm's have the same airflow as
many 140mm's, at a lower volume. A cooler running a 140mm fan would have
clashed with the graphics card backplate.) All this to make sure a system
doesn't explode when in use. For even more powerful systems than mine, some
have 9 case fans without even counting those for the CPU and GPU.

Sometimes I wonder where we'll end up with this. Assuming the desktop
computer will still exist in 2043, wiill we then be building a computer
running 94 pins of power to the motherboard, on a 1400W power supplay, with
16 fans of about 180mm, just for an enthusiast / somewhat high-end system?

Maybe we will have to mount a extra few solar panels to the top of the roof
just to power our desktop computer or something.