# Detecting draws by FIDE rules

To be able to play chess properly, the engine has to be able to detect
draws. In addition, to fully support the XBoard protocol [(see the chapter
about communication)](../communication/communication.html), it has to be
able to claim those draws. This chapter describes how to use the board
representation to detect these draws.

## Draw by insufficient material rule

There is a rule in chess which is often misunderstood: draw by insufficient
material. It seems simple: if none of the players have enough material on
the board to checkmate the king, a draw can be claimed. However, this is
not exactly what the "FIDE Laws of Chess" handbook
([download](https://www.fide.com/FIDE/handbook/LawsOfChess.pdf)) says. The
relevant rule is as follows:

> The game is drawn when a position has arisen in which neither player can
> checkmate the opponentâ€™s king with any series of legal moves.

This is slightly different from the commonly held belief of "not having
enough material to checkmate the enemy king. If you have a King+Bishop vs.
King, then the position is a draw, because no player can checkmate the
other using any series of legal moves. What about King+Bishop vs.
King+Bishop, or King+Knight vs. King+Knight? These positions should be
drawn, because no player can achieve a mate, right? Wrong...

K+B vs. K+B:<br />
<img src="../../positions/kbkb_mate.png" />

K+N vs. K+N:<br />
<img src="../../positions/knkn_mate.png" />

*Foul play!* I hear you cry. *Black must have assisted white in achieving
these mates, because they cannot be forced!* True enough: these mates
cannot be forced. Black must assist white by blocking his own king with his
last move, so white can deliver mate. However, these positions are
achievable through a series of legal moves. This means that a player can
not _claim_ a draw on the basis of insufficient material. Of course, both
players can agree on a draw because they both know that the other will not
assist in getting mated. Even if one of the players refuses to agree on a
draw, the game will eventually run into the 50-move rule and be drawn
anyway.

Because of the above, the function which implements this rule
(*draw_by_insufficient_material_rule()*) is different from the function
used during searching (*sufficient_material_to_force_checkmate()*). This
function determines if it is legal, according to the rules of chess, to
claim a draw and end the game. The function used during searching
determines if one of the players is still able to force a checkmate, and if
not, to score the position as a draw.

> Note that no mate can ever be achieved in a King+Bishop vs. King+Bishop
> position, if both bishops are on squares of the same color. Any position
> with that material is therefore claimable as a draw.

The function implementing this rule is fairly simple. It just lists all the
positions in which a draw by insufficient material can be claimed:

```csharp
pub fn draw_by_insufficient_material_rule(&self) -> bool {
    // Get the piece bitboards for white and black.
    let w = self.get_bitboards(Sides::WHITE);
    let b = self.get_bitboards(Sides::BLACK);

    // Determine if at least one side has either a Queen, a Rook or a
    // pawn (qrp). If is the case, a draw by rule is not possible.
    let qrp = w[Pieces::QUEEN] != 0
        || w[Pieces::ROOK] != 0
        || w[Pieces::PAWN] != 0
        || b[Pieces::QUEEN] != 0
        || b[Pieces::ROOK] != 0
        || b[Pieces::PAWN] != 0;

    // No queens, rooks or pawns. We may have a draw.
    if !qrp {
        // King vs. King
        let kk = w[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0;
        // King/Bishop vs. King
        let kbk = w[Pieces::BISHOP].count_ones() == 1
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0;
        // King/Knight vs. King
        let knk = w[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT].count_ones() == 1
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0;
        // King vs. King/Bishop
        let kkb = w[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP].count_ones() == 1
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0;
        // King vs. King/Knight
        let kkn = w[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP] == 0
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT].count_ones() == 1;
        // King/Bishop vs. King/Bishop
        let kbkb = w[Pieces::BISHOP].count_ones() == 1
            && w[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0
            && b[Pieces::BISHOP].count_ones() == 1
            && b[Pieces::KNIGHT] == 0;

        // Both bishops have to be on the same colored square for a
        // draw to be claimable.
        let same_color_sq = if kbkb {
            let wb_sq = w[Pieces::BISHOP].trailing_zeros() as usize;
            let bb_sq = b[Pieces::BISHOP].trailing_zeros() as usize;

            Board::is_white_square(wb_sq) == Board::is_white_square(bb_sq)
        } else {
            false
        };

        if kk || kbk || knk || kkb || kkn || (kbkb && same_color_sq) {
            return true;
        }
    }

    // All other cases cannot be claimed as a draw.
    false
}
```