# About me

Hi again,

Right before the end of all things, I'll drop in a short scribble about
myself. I'm sure you're just _dying_ to read a rambling piece of text
that's all about me, myself and I.

*crickets*

Oh. Right. Just let's forge on anyway :)

My name is Marcel, as you may already know from the preface. I'll mention
it because you probably skipped the preface like everyone else. Guilty as
charged... I thought about not even writing it. I have a degree in Applied
Computer Science (called "Technische Informatica" at the time, in Dutch)
from [Zuyd University of Applied Sciences]((https://www.zuyd.nl/en)), with
specialization in software engineering with regard to writing embedded
software. My main occupation at the moment is writing backends for business
software.

Even though it would be easy to spend quite some time talking about my
other hobbies, such as reading, martial arts, photography, music and
others, I'm sure the main stuff you're interested in is about chess and
computers, so I'll just focus on that.

I've been playing chess off and on since I was about 7-8 years old and I
also got to work with computers since I was about 10. Ever since I got my
first chess computer and later, chess program on a PC, I wanted to write my
own chess-playing software. At around 1994/1995, when I was just a teenager
who had been jacking around with computers for a few years, I tried to do
so in Turbo/Borland Pascal 7.0, using the only two useful books from the
library: "Borland Pascal 7.0" by Jeff Duntemann, published by Academic
Service, and a book about chess computers and algorithms I don't really
remember.

This chess program partially succeeded. The program just had a command-line
interface, so you had to put in your moves on the keyboard, just like the
chess computers from the 70's, by typing e2e4 and pressing Enter. You also
had to have own board present to see the position. It played legal chess
most of the time, but it was easy to crash and easy to defeat. Not
blundering any pieces was enough to win.

After I finished high-school and went to study computer science, playing
chess as a hobby basically dropped by the wayside for quite a number of
years, but I still wanted to write a chess engine "some day." It took me
nearly 20 years to get around to it, because there are always more
important things to do: study, work, moving, having a girlfriend, sports...
well, you know. There's no human alive who has never postponed anything.
Also, I didn't want to write a chess engine in C or C++, because everybody
else already had one in either or both (!) of those languages.

So I finished my studies, got to work at several companies, and chess
remained just a hobby with writing a chess engine stuffed away in the back
of my mind somewhere.

Then at some point I heard about Rust as an alternative to C and C++. I
started following the language, and _serious_ thoughts about finally
writing that chess engine cropped up again when it reached version 1.0 in
2015. While I was intrigued with the premise of this language and tinkered
around with it, I found it somewhat cumbersome to use. The authors promised
that this would get better in newer editions. Three years later, Edition
2018 was released, and it _did_ get better, by a lot, so I started to
dabble with the first bits of code that are now Rustic, in the summer of
2019. Around that time my girlfriend had moved in with me, saving lots of
time travelling back and forth. We also know what happened in November of
that year: the COVID-19 outbreak and the pandemic following it. That showed
that working from actually _was_ possible. So in 2020 I started working
from home, which cut down on home-work travel time. All that extra time was
enough to finally start writing that chess engine in earnest.

[Here it is](https://github.com/mvanthoor/rustic), and this book you are
reading is its documentation, written in such a way that it hopefully can
be used to create a similar chess engine in any desired programming
language. I hope you enjoy using this engine, or reading the book and the
comments in the code, trying to learn how to write your own.

Kind regards,
Marcel